Student Performance Q&A: 

2004 AP® World History Free-Response Questions 

The following comments on the 2004 free-response questions for AP® World History were 
written by the Chief Reader, Kenneth R. Curtis of California State University, Long Beach. 
They give an overview of each free-response question and of how students performed on the 
question, including typical student errors. General comments regarding the skills and content 
that students frequently have the most problems with are included. Some suggestions for 
improving student performance in these areas are also provided. Teachers are encouraged to 
attend a College Board workshop to learn strategies for improving student performance in 
specific areas. 

Question 1 

What was the intent of this question? 

The intent of this document-based question (DBQ) was to assess students’ skills in working with 
documents to produce an analytical essay. Students were given historical background information 
that provided a chronological framework from the first century C.E. to 570 C.E. and included some 
specific reasons for political unrest or instability in China. The six documents were all fairly lengthy 
written texts and arranged in chronological order. This year’s DBQ had no pictures, charts, or 
maps. The attributions/source information included the dates of the documents and information 
about each author’s social and/or professional status and whether he was an acknowledged 
Confucianist or Buddhist. All of the documents were written by Chinese elite males, except the 
excerpt from “The Four Noble Truths,” which was neither Chinese nor within the chronologial 
framework of the historical background. Based on these documents, students should have been 
able to analyze political, social, economic, and religious responses to the spread of Buddhism in 
China. 

As with all DBQs in AP World History, students were required to analyze point of view (POV) in the 
documents and to specify at least one additional type of document(s) that would help them answer 
the question more fully. Although the question specifically asked for an additional document that 
related to the extent of the appeal of Buddhism, Readers were fairly liberal in the type of additional 
document(s) they accepted as long as students made clear the connection between the additional 
document(s) and their answer to the question.  

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
How well did students perform on this question?  

On the whole, students performed well on this question. The mean score was 4.3 out of a possible 
10 points, which was significantly higher than the mean scores achieved on the other two free-
response questions. Since the DBQ in AP World History does not require the use of outside 
information, this means that many students are learning the skills associated with document 
analysis.  

The question was straightforward and the majority of the students had a thesis statement in the 
beginning or at the conclusion of their essay. Most students were able to obtain the point for 
grouping the documents appropriately. (They were held to the rather low standard of only having to 
produce two relevant groupings, rather than three as in past years. Because of the nature of the 
question, most students produced only the simple groupings of “pro-Buddhist” and “anti-
Buddhist.”) They had no trouble using all or all but one of the documents, and they had no trouble 
with grouping documents as a form of analysis. Document 3 was the only document that was 
generally difficult for students to interpret. (The documents and their attributions made it obvious 
that there were negative and positive responses.) It was gratifying to see how many students had 
been taught to ask for an additional document and, in fact, worked the request into the framework 
of their essay. In addition, compared with previous years, an increasing number of students did 
well in analyzing the POV of the documents.  

What were common student errors or omissions?  

As in years past, the two most frequently missed skills points in the basic core section of the 
scoring guidelines were POV (Number 5) and the request for additional documents (Number 7). 
Both of these points are exclusive to the DBQ, so one might conclude that students are not trained 
systematically to write DBQs and therefore have not internalized these skills. On the other hand, 
these directions are written on the exam and the requirement to ask for additional documents was 
part of the actual question, so there is not much excuse for students forgetting to do these tasks.  

Other common student errors the Readers encountered involved using the documents, additional 
documents, and the historical background section; analyzing the documents for POV; and not 
supporting their essay with evidence from the documents. 

•  Using the Documents. When working with the documents themselves, students had 
some trouble figuring out what to do with Document 1 (according to Buddhist tradition, 
“The Four Noble Truths”) since it was both outside the time period of the rest of the 
documents and it had no direct relevance to the spread of Buddhism in China. It was the 
document most frequently left out of students’ essays. Students most frequently 
misinterpreted Document 3 (anonymous Chinese scholar, “The Disposition of Error”). In this 
document, written in a question-answer style, the stronger adjectives were in the anti-
Buddhist explications while the pro-Buddhist responses were milder in language and tone. 
Many students, therefore, incorrectly saw this as an anti-Buddhist document. If they 
correctly interpreted all the other documents, however, this mistake did not hurt their 
score. 

•  Requesting Additional Documents. Students (and teachers) did a much better job than 
in past years with the analytical skill of realizing they could strengthen their arguments by 
using another document. Therefore, the Development Committee raised the bar for what it 
considered to be the minimally acceptable standard for this scoring point: it mandated that 
students explain why a particular document would be appropriate to their argument. Thus, 
Readers did not accept a request or a list that had no explicit or contextual reference to its 
appropriateness. Statements like “I would like a map” or “I would like a document from a 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

2

 
 
 
woman” without any explanation of how such a document would help further the student’s 
argument were not accepted.  

Requiring students to explain why a document is appropriate, either specifically or within 
the context of a paragraph, rather than merely listing any random piece of evidence, is 
within the logic of the historical/analytical skill of this core point. While Readers did hold 
students to this standard, they were more flexible in the range of requests for the additional 
documents they accepted. There was a very explicit direction to ask for additional 
documentation to show the extent of the appeal of Buddhism. Most students did not follow 
this directive, and therefore Readers did not hold them to it; rather, they accepted a wide 
range of requests as long as students explained why it would be appropriate. 

•  Acknowledging Historical Background. On the whole, most students did not realize 

that the historical background section had any relevance to the task at hand, and therefore 
their essays showed no sense of chronologically specific attitudes. When Readers saw a 
chronologically argued essay, they could anticipate that it would have the potential to be 
quite good. More generally, students ignored the dates of the documents almost 
completely. 

•  Analyzing for Point of View. Mere attribution (repeating the identifying information of 
the document) has never been enough to attain this point on the exam. Students need to 
explain why this particular person produced this particular document at this particular time 
or place. Some students still have difficulty with this analytical skill (which may be either a 
teaching issue or a developmental issue related to the fact that most of the exam takers are 
sophomores). Many students, however, understood how to analyze documents for POV, and 
therefore the Development Committee raised the bar from previous years and required 
students to correctly analyze the POV of three documents to attain this core point. (The 
Generic Core-Scoring Guide for AP World History Document-Based Question, which can be 
found on page 34 in the Course Description, sets a minimal standard of analyzing POV in 
“at least two or three documents.”) Students who missed the POV point usually did no POV 
analysis; there were few students who missed the point because they did POV analysis of 
two documents instead of three. 

•  Supporting with Evidence. Interestingly, the most difficult and problematic point for 

students this year was Number 4 on the Generic Core-Scoring Guide: “Supports thesis with 
appropriate evidence from documents.” Frequently, students merely summarized the 
documents rather than analyzing them. Or to phrase it another way, they cited information 
from documents but never explained why that information was relevant to “analyzing the 
responses to the spread of Buddhism in China.” Often, essays degenerated into “this person 
liked Buddhism, and this one didn’t.” One method Readers used to discriminate summary 
from analysis was to ask if the student made any commentary on specific information.  

Based on your experience of student responses at the AP Reading, what message 
would you like to send to teachers that might help them to improve the performance of 
their students on the exam? 

Based on these essays, teachers need to continue to emphasize the following basic skills with their 
students. 

•  Working with Documents. Students need steady and consistent training in working 
with documents throughout the year. They need to be exposed to both simple and 
sophisticated documents on a regular basis. Even though this particular DBQ did not have 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

3

 
 
visual documents like charts, maps, or photographs, these should not be ignored in training 
students for DBQ analysis.   

•  Understanding the Scoring Guidelines. Teachers need to realize that the Generic 

Core-Scoring Guide sets the minimal acceptable standards. For example, students should 
be taught to analyze POV in every document on a DBQ, not just two or three, in order to 
satisfy the scoring guidelines. Likewise, students should be taught to explain why an 
additional document might be useful to them and not merely taught such mechanical 
“tricks” as always asking for a “woman’s document” or “a peasant document.” 

•  Finding POV. Teachers need to continue to teach students how to assess POV. Teachers 
should avoid the use of the term “bias” if at all possible. Even though this word is currently 
used in the Generic Core-Scoring Guide, most students think of bias as a negative quality, 
and that compounds the difficulty in teaching them to analyze for POV. In its simplest 
analysis, students need to ascertain why this particular person held this particular opinion 
at this particular time and/or place. They might also consider the audience for whom the 
document was originally produced and the tone of the document, if appropriate.   

•  Paying Attention to Chronology. Most students ignored the dates of the documents, 

and yet this chronology in tandem with the historical background section was the simplest 
way to argue or structure the essay. In fact, the best students did recognize that Chinese 
attitudes toward Buddhism changed over time. This lack of attention to chronology is 
particularly puzzling since AP World History students are also writing change-over-time 
essays. Perhaps the solution is for teachers to write practice DBQs for which dates are key 
to successful analysis. Chronological grouping of documents should be encouraged when 
relevant. 

•  Analyzing Information. Students need to be taught the distinction between “plot 

summary” (what the document says) and “analysis” (how it supports the thesis/argument). 
One way to phrase it might be to ask “so what?” when students cite a piece of information. 
Rather than just repeating information from the documents, students must comment on 
information and relate it to the broader question. 

•  Requesting Additional Documents. Teachers have done an impressive job of teaching 

students to wonder what other document(s) might make their arguments stronger. 
Teachers need to emphasize that the call for an additional document needs to be explained 
by asking why that document would be appropriate. 

Question 2 

What was the intent of this question? 

The intent of this change-over-time (COT) question was to focus students on issues of changing 
labor systems, one of the topics of the AP World History course as detailed in the Summary Course 
Outline for World History in the Course Description. Students were to analyze changes in labor 
systems during a single chronological period, 1750–1914. (In previous years, COT questions have 
asked students to analyze changes across two time periods.) Although all students were required 
to answer this question, they were given a choice of regional focus. Students had to draw on their 
knowledge of world events and processes to explain the causes of changes. In addition, they had to 
draw upon the information throughout the entire time period to describe at least one continuity 
that was also shaped by world events or processes.  

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

4

 
 
 
How well did students perform on this question? 

The mean score was 2.5 out of a possible nine points, a disappointing result that indicates that 
insufficient attention has been paid to changing labor systems.  

For this year’s question there was a considerable varation in the quality of essays, depending on 
which region was selected. In general, students who selected Russia seemed to have a basic 
understanding of serfdom and the process of emancipation and could say something about 
Russia’s process of industrialization. Students who chose Latin America and the Caribbean tended 
to be slightly less able than those who chose Russia, but they were generally able to write essays 
that focused on relevant issues like the plantation economies and the abolition of slavery. Overall, 
students who chose sub-Saharan Africa were the weakest performers. Their answers tended to 
focus too exclusively on slavery, and in that context they paid little attention to the effect of slavery 
and its abolition within Africa itself. Less common were essays that included relevant information 
on labor systems associated with European colonialism in the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries.  

What were common student errors or omissions? 

Common student errors basically depended on the area of the world a student chose. 

•  Russia. The most prevalent error from students who wrote about Russia was the inclusion 
of information from outside of the question’s time frame. For example, students wrote about 
Peter the Great, communism, Stalin, or Russia being industrialized in 1750. Accurate 
chronology is still a problem for students. 

•  Latin America and the Caribbean. The most prevalent error from students who wrote 
about this area was the emphasis on slave trade instead of the labor system of slavery, and 
students made little mention of other kinds of labor, except indentured workers. Some 
students also provided inaccurate information about industrialization and factory workers 
being in all of Latin America and not in specific countries. Others wrote that emancipation 
led to rapid industrialization.  

•  Sub-Saharan Africa. Some of the students who wrote about sub-Saharan Africa were not 
familiar with this area and included countries not in Africa. Many other students discussed 
the Atlantic slave trade but not in the context of its impact on Africa. Most of the students 
who chose Africa wrote about slavery but very rarely discussed any other labor systems, 
such as wage labor, in Africa. Students also sometimes tended to skip the imperialist 
period entirely, focusing on the slave trade without reference to continuity of internal forced 
labor. One of the main reasons for these omissions is the lack of coverage of nineteenth-
century Africa in textbooks other than in the context of slavery or colonialism; textbooks 
contain little about specific labor systems besides slavery and other forms of coerced labor. 

Based on your experience of student responses at the AP Reading, what message 
would you like to send to teachers that might help them to improve the performance of 
their students on the exam? 

Based on these essays, teachers need to continue to emphasize the following basic skills with their 
students. 

• 

Increasing Understanding of Key Terms. Probably the most significant problem was 
students’ lack of understanding of the term “labor system,” even though it is a key element 
of one of the diverse interpretations questions (Number 7) in the 1750–1914 section of the 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

5

 
 
 
Course Description’s Summary Course Outline of World History and is used in a sample 
essay in the Course Description. Students need a better sense of the definitions of key 
terms included in the Course Description’s Themes section and the Habits of Mind or Skills 
section, like patterns of interaction, demography, technology, social structure, gender 
structure, and so on. Many students identified labor systems with trade, the economy, or 
economic development. 

•  Working with Continuity and COT. Teachers and students need to be reminded that 
this is a continuity and COT question. Teachers need to structure the course so that 
continuities in various themes are an integral part of the curriculum and explicitly 
identified throughout the year on an ongoing basis. Students need to practice identifying 
implicit and explicit examples of historical continuity in textbooks. When the references to 
continuity are implicit rather than explicit (as is often the case), teachers need to provide 
information and opportunities for increased student knowledge in this area. The 
relationship between changes and continuities should be a regular focus of the AP World 
History course. 

•  Following the Course Description. Teachers must stay focused on the Course 

Description, especially the Themes section and the Habits of Mind or Skills section. This 
course does not focus on just political history; students need information on social history, 
economic history, and the other domains that are identified in the Course Description. 

•  Working with Time Periods. Students need to work more with timelines or other forms 
of chronology, even if the focus is just on major events. They also need to be familiar with 
the way in which AP World History organizes time periods, which can be seen in the 
Course Description’s Summary Course Outline for World History. 

•  Answering the Question. Students must be trained to answer the question that has 

been asked, not the question they would like to answer, within the specified time period. 
They need practice in (1) reading the question, (2) identifying the task, and (3) writing a 
thesis statement that answers the question. Emphasize the importance of a clear thesis 
statement, which preferably appears at the beginning of the essay. Finally, teach students 
to make generalizations but also to use specific examples or case studies to cite specific 
evidence. The best essays are those that contain a regular interplay between facts and 
interpretation or evidence and analysis. 

Question 3 

What was the intent of this question? 

This comparative question sought to relate the political, social, cultural, and economic events of 
World War I to the regions of the Middle East, South Asia, and East Asia through the 1930s. By 
making the global linkages, the interwar period can be seen to be a significant era in numerous 
regions of the world, not simply in Europe. The question required students to explain the interwar 
decade as a period of crucial importance in twentieth-century world history, not merely as an 
interlude between two world wars.  

How well did students perform on this question?  

Students on the whole did very poorly on this question. The mean score of 2.0 out of a possible nine 
points was the worst performance on any free-response question since the launch of the AP World 
History Exam in 2002. One reason for this weak performance was the fact that over 15,000 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

6

 
 
 
 
students, 34.3 percent of the total, scored either a 0 or “no response” on this question. A great 
many students either had nothing at all to say on this subject, or ran out of time before they 
reached the third question, or both.   

What were common student errors or omissions?  

The common errors Readers encountered can be grouped into three general areas: 
temporal/spatial, content, and skills. 

•  Temporal/Spatial. Many students began or ended their essays outside the stated time 
frame (1914–39) or used regions not specified by the question. A surprising number of 
students simply began their essays with a summary of the war in Europe. Others included 
irrelevant late nineteenth-century background (seemingly trying to include any information 
on the region in question that they could muster for the exam, such as the Sepoy Rebellion 
and the Meiji Restoration). Many took their responses through World War II; this was 
especially true in the context of China and Japan, with numerous responses taking their 
answer up through the early 1940s. Since Readers used scoring guidelines that included a 
basic core section of skills, students were not explicitly penalized for including information 
outside the bounds of the question. However, doing so reduced their chance of producing a 
relevant analysis backed by appropriate evidence.  

In spatial terms, students were sometimes confused about what nations lie within a given 
region. The distinction between South Asia and Southeast Asia is one common cause of 
confusion, as is the relationship of Turkey to the Middle East. 

•  Content. The most common errors in content centered on the fact that many students 

could not see any logical narrative to link World War I to the regions listed. As a result, an 
overwhelming number of essays on this question tended to warp their answer through a 
Eurocentric lens: discussions of impact and effect centered on the actions of Europeans in 
these areas. Very few stated the significance of central factors like the Treaty of Versailles, 
the League of Nations’ Mandates, or indigenous reactions like the May Fourth Movement 
in China or Ataturk’s role in Turkey’s independence.  

Many students saw (or at least identified) the significance of nationalism, colonialism (or 
decolonization), and capitalism, but few were able to successfully link the war to these 
processes.   

Finally, there continued to be an overwhelming tendency to offer unsubstantiated 
generalizations that often never related to the war itself. Those essays that did make it into 
the expanded core of the scoring guidelines often included sophisticated analysis and 
comparisons/contrasts about areas/countries within the specific region. 

•  Skills. Readers continued to find writing a significant hurdle for many of the students. 
Only a small minority of the exams included an analytical thesis. Many were still simply 
trying to reword the question. Even more troubling was the lack of meaningful, analytical, 
and substantial direct comparison between the selected regions. An essay based on 
separate lists of factors for the two selected regions does not add up to an appropriate 
comparison. Finally, there remained a large number of responses that displayed difficulty in 
addressing all parts of the question (e.g., time, regions, and comparison/contrast).  

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

7

 
 
Based on your experience of student responses at the AP Reading, what message 
would you like to send to teachers that might help them to improve the performance of 
their students on the exam?  

Based on these essays teachers need to continue to emphasize three basic components: test-
taking strategies, writing techniques, and coverage. 

•  Test-Taking Strategies. Teachers need to reinforce the need to organize an essay and 
the information contained therein. Taking the time to read the question carefully, to 
understand its full implications, and to address the information it asks for would improve 
students’ essays. In addition, students need to have both the endurance and time 
management skills that are necessary for them to do well on the final essay on the exam. 
These skills need to be developed during the course of the year. 

•  Writing Techniques. Responses continue to lack good thesis statements that clearly and 
analytically address the question. Students who continue to simply reword the question or 
add a vague qualifier do not and will not meet the basic criteria for a thesis. The best 
essays made direct comparisons/contrasts and did not divide the essay along geographic 
lines. When given the task of comparison, students should be encouraged to think first of 
what they are going to compare between two or more cases. They can then write an 
analytical thesis that focuses on theme or themes of the comparison, providing appropriate 
evidence for the specific cases under discussion. 

•  Coverage. A common error among many of the essays was simply forgetting to address 

the full thematic, area (regional), and range of time asked by the question. Also emphasize 
that students need to focus on the regions specified by the question and not on the ways in 
which the West affected that region (or vice versa), where there is little evaluation of the 
region itself (e.g., the costs of colonialism in India for Great Britain). 

Finally, there continues to be a lingering Eurocentrism in many of the responses. In part, this is a 
result of the tendency of textbooks to address the twentieth century by region and not by theme. In 
addition, it seems that many teachers may have been in a rush to complete the course and, to the 
extent that they covered the twentieth century at all, focused on traditional, Western-oriented 
accounts of such phenomena as World War I and the interwar period. Teachers need to pace their 
courses in such a way that the twentieth century receives adequate coverage, and they need to 
bring the same global and thematic emphasis to their treatment of the period from 1914 to the 
present that they have developed for earlier periods. 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
