AP® World History 
2005 Scoring Commentary 

The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success  

The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and 
opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,700 schools, colleges, universities, and other 
educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves over three and a half million students and their parents, 23,000 
high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, 
enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced 
Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is 
embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 

Copyright © 2005 by College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, APCD, Advanced Placement Program, AP, 
AP Vertical Teams, Pre-AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. 
Admitted Class Evaluation Service, CollegeEd, Connect to college success, MyRoad, SAT Professional Development, SAT 
Readiness Program, and Setting the Cornerstones are trademarks owned by the College Entrance Examination Board. 
PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Entrance Examination Board and National Merit Scholarship 
Corporation. Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College 
Board materials may be requested online at: http://www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. 
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program and Pre-AP: apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® WORLD HISTORY 
2005 SCORING COMMENTARY 

Question 1 

Overview 

The intent of the document-based question (DBQ) is to assess students’ skills in working with a 
preselected set of documents. Students are asked to analyze the documents, draft an appropriate line of 
reasoning, and compose an analytical essay. This year’s documents all focused on secular nationalism, 
pan-Arab nationalism, and pan-Islamic nationalism in South Asia and North Africa during the twentieth 
century. Muslim males wrote all six of the documents. All except one were written or published between 
1900 and 1938—a 1985 speech was the single exception. The attribution/source for each document 
included facts about the authors’ social/professional status and about their political activities; in some 
instances, the dates; and the medium of each document (e.g., letter, speech). In addition, the historical 
background provided with the question offered information on the 1947 partitioning of South Asia into 
Pakistan and India and the dates of Algeria’s and Egypt’s independence from France and Great Britain, 
respectively. This year’s document-based question included no maps, charts, or pictures. 

Sample: 1A 
Score: 9 

The essay has an acceptable thesis, relating the issues of foreign influence and knowledge (1 point). All six 
documents are appropriately employed and support the thesis (2 points). The essay offers good analysis and 
displays a nuanced understanding of the documents, which are meaningfully grouped (1 and 3; 2, 3, and 5; 4, 
5, and 6) (2 points). The author’s point of view in document 1 is adequately analyzed (1 point). Two additional 
appropriate types of documents are related to the essay’s argument (1 point). The student earned 2 
expanded-core points for the careful, insightful analysis of the documents and the analysis of an additional 
grouping. 

Sample: 1B 
Score: 6 

The essay exceeds the minimum standards for 6 of the 7 points in the basic core-scoring guideline. It has 
an acceptable thesis (1 point). The student demonstrates understanding of all six documents, which are 
grouped appropriately (2 and 5; 1 and 4; 3 and 6), and provides evidence for the essay’s thesis using every 
document (4 points). The essay requests an additional document of past Muslim leaders such as Mongols 
or (and perhaps more appropriately) Ottomans, to further its analysis of the issues (1 point). Although the 
essay attempts analysis of point of view in several instances, each instance does not go beyond simple 
attribution.  

Sample: 1C 
Score: 4 

The essay has an inaccurate thesis. The student uses all six documents, exhibits a basic understanding of 
documents 1, 2, 4, and 6, and groups the documents appropriately (1 and 6; 2 and 5) (3 points). Even 
though document 5 is misinterpreted, it is correctly grouped with document 2. None of the evidence 
correctly relates back to the thesis. Though analysis of point of view is attempted with document 1, it is 
inadequate because it does not move beyond description of the individual to explain why the author’s 
point of view is significant. The essay requests an appropriate additional document (1 point).  

Copyright © 2005 by College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® WORLD HISTORY 
2005 SCORING COMMENTARY 

Question 2 

Overview 

The change-over-time question required students to work within the context of the Atlantic world from 
1492 to 1750. Noting that the period was one of new contacts between Western Europe, Africa, and the 
Americas, the question asked students to analyze the social and economic transformations that resulted 
from those contacts. The question provided sufficient chronological and geographic information to position 
the Atlantic world within the context of global history.  

Sample: 2A 
Score: 9 

The thesis statement in the first paragraph incorporates the three regions of the Atlantic world while 
making an argument about social and economic transformations (1 point). The essay describes three 
economic transformations (global economy, slave trade, and plantations) and three social transformations 
(slave trade and African society, slave trade and society in the Americas, and hybrid cultures). While the 
entire essay is analytical, the specific analysis of the slave trade in the global economy is noteworthy  
(2 points). The essay contains more than adequate historical evidence, including references not often seen 
in mainstream responses: “creole languages” and “’engenhos’” (2 points). The student places the Atlantic 
world in the context of world history and connects the Atlantic world to global processes (“trans-Saharan 
slave trade”). Interactions between regions within the Atlantic world are evident throughout the essay (1 
point). Three expanded-core points were awarded for thesis, global context, and evidence.  

Sample: 2B 
Score: 6 

This essay meets all of the requirements of the basic core. The thesis statement (in the first paragraph) 
draws together elements of social and economic transformation (1 point). Although the term “genocide” is 
misused in the first paragraph, the error is not a factor in the remainder of the essay. There are two social 
transformations (new social classes in the Americas and new foods) and two economic transformations 
(mercantilism and the slave trade). Analysis is limited, but it is present in the connection between the 
requirements of mercantilism and the productivity of plantations in the Americas (2 points). The essay 
contains adequate supporting evidence (2 points). Global context is evident in the discussion of 
interactions in the Atlantic world and in the connection to later events (1 point).  

Sample: 2C 
Score: 4 

This essay represents a typical 4. While there is a weak connection between social/economic transformations 
and colonization in the first paragraph, the essay lacks a clear thesis statement. The essay includes one social 
transformation (the Columbian Exchange) and one economic transformation (mercantilism and resources), 
along with an attempt at analysis in the discussion of the Columbian Exchange (1 point). There is sufficient 
evidence to support the discussion of transformations (2 points). Minimally acceptable global context is 
evident in the discussion of the Columbian Exchange (1 point). The discussion of the colonization of Africa is 
irrelevant to the time frame of the question.  

Copyright © 2005 by College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
AP® WORLD HISTORY 
2005 SCORING COMMENTARY 

Question 3 

Overview 

The primary task of the comparative essay was to analyze similarities and differences, comparing and 
contrasting the effects of Mongol rule in two of three Eurasian societies. Students were to focus on the 
period after Mongols took power; therefore, evidence about Mongol invasions and military prowess was 
irrelevant. Students were to provide political and economic examples of the effects of Mongol rule. 

Sample: 3A  
Score: 9 

The thesis is indeed the first sentence, where differences and similarities of the effects of Mongol rule are 
spelled out (1 point). All four parts of the question are addressed in a comparative political paragraph and a 
comparative economic paragraph (2 points). There are many more than four pieces of correct and relevant 
evidence (2 points) and several direct and relevant comparisons for both political and economic topics (1 
point). The structure of the essay, with its two comparative paragraphs, lends itself to consistent and 
multiple direct comparisons. The best political comparison is the last sentence in the second paragraph 
(“It boils down to the fact that the Mongols exerted much more influence over Chinese soverienty [sic], 
culture, and policy than they did over those of the Russians.”), while the whole economic paragraph is 
interwoven with comparisons and contrasts. This essay fulfills the basic core requirements and earned 
expanded-core points for its consistent attention to analysis and its use of correct and relevant examples. It 
is not perfect; the thesis is not entirely focused, and the political analysis of Russia is weaker than the 
other analyses. (The fact that there is no conclusion is immaterial: conclusions are not required, since this 
is not a composition test.)  

Sample: 3B 
Score: 6 

The thesis is the first sentence, which meets the minimum qualification of similarities and differences (1 
point). Each region is addressed in an economic and a political paragraph (2 points). There are four pieces 
of correct and relevant evidence: silk roads, conveyance of technology and science, centralized Yuan, and 
decentralized Russia (2 points). The topic sentences of the second and third paragraphs function as the 
direct economic and political comparisons (1 point). (Using a topic sentence as a direct comparison was 
particularly effective in many student essays.) The essay fulfills all core requirements but does nothing that 
extends it beyond the basic core.  

Sample: 3C 
Score: 3 

The essay does not contain a thesis that deals with similarities and differences. (The last paragraph deals 
only with differences.) There is a political paragraph and an economic paragraph that mention both 
regions, so the essay addresses all four parts of the question (2 points). There are only three pieces of 
correct evidence: both Mongol regimes allowed religious freedom; new economic center in Russia 
(although it is Moscow, not St. Petersburg); and the “Mongols maintained the silk road” (1 point). There is 
one correct political comparison in the second paragraph, but the other attempts at direct comparisons are 
inaccurate, and thus the essay received no points for comparisons. 

Copyright © 2005 by College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
