AP® World History 
2005 Free-Response Questions 

The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success  

The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and 
opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,700 schools, colleges, universities, and other 
educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves over three and a half million students and their parents, 23,000 
high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, 
enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced 
Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is 
embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 

Copyright © 2005 by College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, APCD, Advanced Placement Program, AP, 
AP Vertical Teams, Pre-AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. 
Admitted Class Evaluation Service, CollegeEd, Connect to college success, MyRoad, SAT Professional Development, SAT 
Readiness Program, and Setting the Cornerstones are trademarks owned by the College Entrance Examination Board. 
PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Entrance Examination Board and National Merit Scholarship 
Corporation. Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College 
Board materials may be requested online at: http://www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. 
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program and Pre-AP: apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2005 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 

You will have 10 minutes to read the contents of this green insert. You are advised to spend most of the 10 minutes 
analyzing the documents and planning your answer for the document-based essay question in Part A. If you have 
time, you may spend some portion of the time reading the questions in Part B and Part C. You may make notes in 
this green insert. At the end of the 10-minute period, you will be told to break the seal on the pink, free-response 
booklet and to begin writing your answers on the lined pages of the booklet. Do not break the seal on the pink 
booklet until you are told to do so. Suggested writing time is 40 minutes for the document-based essay question in 
Part A. You will have 5 minutes of planning time and 35 minutes of writing time for each essay question in Part B 
and in Part C. 

BE SURE TO MANAGE YOUR TIME CAREFULLY. 

Note:  This examination uses the chronological designations B.C.E. (before the common era) and C.E. (common era). 
These labels correspond to B.C. (before Christ) and A.D. (anno Domini), which are used in some world history 
textbooks. 

Part A 
(Suggested writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-6. The documents have been edited 
for the purpose of this exercise. Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. 

This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. Write an essay that: 
  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with evidence from the documents. 
  • Uses all or all but one of the documents. 
  • Analyzes the documents by grouping them in as many appropriate ways as possible. Does not simply 

summarize the documents individually. 

  • Takes into account both the sources of the documents and the authors’ points of view. 

You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 

 1.  Analyze the issues that twentieth-century Muslim leaders in South Asia and North 

Africa confronted in defining their nationalism. What additional kind of document(s) 
would be most helpful in furthering your analysis? 

  Historical Background:  In 1947 British-controlled South Asia was partitioned to  

form the Islamic state of Pakistan and the secular state of India. In North Africa, Egypt 
gained partial independence from Great Britain in 1922, but the British kept control of 
the Suez Canal until 1954. Algeria gained independence from France in 1962.  

Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

2 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2005 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 1

Source:  Syed Ahmad Khan, educator and founder of the Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, 
undated letter to a fellow Muslim, published two years after Khan’s death, Several Notable 
Letters of Sir Syed Ahmad Khan, India, 1900. 

If the Muslims do not take to the system of education introduced by the British, they will not 
only remain a backward community, but will sink lower and lower until there will be no hope of 
recovery left to them. 

If the choice were to lie between giving up and preserving Islam, I would have unhesitatingly 
chosen Islam. That, however, is not the choice. The adoption of the new system of education 
does not mean the renunciation of Islam. It means its protection. We are justly proud of the 
achievements of our forefathers in the fields of learning and culture, but these achievements 
were possible only because they were willing to act upon the teachings of the Prophet 
Muhammad. The Prophet said that knowledge is the heritage of the believer and that he should 
acquire it wherever he can find it. He also said that the Muslims should seek knowledge even if 
they have to go to China, which at that time was one of the most civilized countries in the world, 
but it was a non-Muslim country and could not teach the Muslims anything about their own 
religion. Did the early Muslims not take to Greek learning avidly? Did this in any respect 
undermine their loyalty to Islam? 

Europe has made such remarkable progress in science that it would be suicidal not to make an 
effort to acquire that knowledge. How can we remain true Muslims or serve Islam if we sink into 
ignorance? 

Document 2

Source:  Ahmad Lutfi as-Sayyid, founder of the Egyptian People’s Party in 1907, Memoirs, 
Egypt, 1965. 

Among our forefathers were those who maintained that the land of Islam is the fatherland of all 
Muslims. However, that is a colonialist formula used to advantage by every colonizing nation that 
seeks to expand its possessions and to extend its influence daily over neighboring countries. 
Today the [traditional Islamic] formula has no reason to exist. We must replace this formula with 
the only doctrine that is in accord with every Eastern nation that possesses a clearly defined sense 
of fatherland. That doctrine is nationalism. 

Our love of Egypt must be free from all conflicting associations. We must suppress our propensity 
for anything other than Egypt because patriotism, which is love of fatherland, does not permit 
such ties. 

Our Egyptian-ness demands that our fatherland be our qibla* and that we not turn our face to any 
other. 

*Marks the direction of Mecca, to which a Muslim turns in prayer. 

Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

3 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2005 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 3

Source:  Abul Kalam Azad, Indian Muslim leader, imprisoned several times by the British for 
political activism, article in a Muslim newspaper, India, 1912. 

It drives me mad today to see the deplorable sight among Muslims where there are only two 
kinds of leaders. For the traditionalists there are the ulama*; for the modernist group, the 
Western-educated intellectuals. Both are ignorant of religion and both are paralyzed limbs of  
the community. The first group is beset by religious superstitions, prejudices, and stagnancy, 
while the other is caught in atheism, imitation of the West, and love of power and position. 

*Islamic scholars. 

Document 4

Source:  Taha Husayn, Muslim literary figure and Egyptian nationalist, The Future of Culture in 
Egypt, Egypt, 1938. 

We Egyptians must not assume the existence of intellectual differences, weak or strong, between 
the Europeans and ourselves or infer that the East mentioned by Kipling* in his famous verse 
“East is East and West is West, and never the twain shall meet” applies to us or our country. 

We want to be like the European nations in military power in order to repel the attack of any 
aggressor and to be able to say to our English friends, “Thank you, you may go, for we can now 
defend the Suez Canal.” Who wants the end must want the means; who wants power must want 
the elements constituting it; who wants a strong European-type army must want European 
training. 

We also need economic independence. I do not mean we should be independent of Arabia, Syria, 
and Iraq, but independent of Europe and America. We must therefore use the same means that the 
Europeans and Americans use to defend their national economies. 

*English novelist, journalist, and longtime resident of South Asia. 

Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

4 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2005 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 5

Source:  Moufdi Zakaria, Algerian nationalist, Fourth Congress of the North African Student 
Association; speech, Algeria, 1935. 

Islam is our religion; North Africa, our fatherland; and Arabic, our language. 

Every Muslim in North Africa, believing in the oneness of North Africa, believing in God and in 
his Prophet, is my brother and shares my soul. I make no distinction between a Tunisian, an 
Algerian, or a Moroccan; nor between a villager and a city dweller, a settled person and a nomad. 
I consider anyone who incites division among the different components of my fatherland as the 
greatest enemy of my fatherland and of myself. I will fight him with every means, even if it is 
against the father who begat me or against my brother. 

We do not hate races. All men are creatures of God. We respect the Europeans established among 
us, as long as they respect us. We shall do them no harm as long as they make no assault on our 
liberties, on our dignity, and on the riches of our country. 

Our fatherland is North Africa. Uniting us with it for eternity are the links of language, of 
Arabness, and of Islam. 

Document 6

Source:  Ahmed Ben Bella, military leader of the Algerian National Liberation Front in the 1950’s 
and first prime minister of Algeria, speech, Islamic Council, Switzerland, 1985. 

For nearly fourteen centuries the Islamic factor has represented the crucial dilemma and the core 
of our identity. We are the product of the challenges it has undergone or made others undergo. 
The relationship with the Christian world, which has often been a relationship of confrontation, 
has helped shape our history and draw the contours of our world of today. But this relationship is 
not linear, is not made merely of confrontations. There were also great moments of synthesis, of 
opening toward the other, of spaces opened for greater comprehension. They coincide, in short, 
with the great moments of our history. Universal inheritances—like the teachings of Aristotle, of 
Plato, or of Socrates, for example—were saved from oblivion by the Muslims. It is there that the 
humanist quest would take on its myriad colors, where the German poet Schiller’s “Ode to Joy” 
has had its deepest echoes. 

END OF PART A 

Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2005 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 
Part B 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 
Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Uses historical context to show change over time and/or continuities. 

 2.  Analyze the social and economic transformations that occurred in the Atlantic world  
as a result of new contacts among Western Europe, Africa, and the Americas from 
1492 to 1750. 

Part C 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 
Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Makes direct, relevant comparisons. 

 3.  Compare and contrast the political and economic effects of Mongol rule on TWO of 

the following regions: 

China 
Middle East 
Russia 

END OF EXAM 

Copyright © 2005 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
