AP® World History 
2003 Scoring Commentary 

The materials included in these files are intended for use by AP teachers  
for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use must be  
sought from the Advanced Placement Program®. Teachers may reproduce them, in 
whole or in part, in limited quantities for noncommercial, face-to-face teaching 
purposes. This permission does not apply to any third-party copyrights contained 
herein. This material may not be mass distributed, electronically or otherwise.  
These materials and any copies made of them may not be resold, and the  
copyright notices must be retained as they appear here. 

These materials were produced by Educational Testing Service® (ETS®), which develops and administers the examinations of the Advanced Placement  
Program for the College Board. The College Board and Educational Testing Service (ETS) are dedicated to the principle of equal opportunity, and their  
programs, services, and employment policies are guided by that principle. 

The College Board is a national nonprofit membership association whose mission is to prepare, inspire, and connect students to college and opportunity.  
Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,300 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the  
College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 22,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in  
college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT ®, the  
PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of equity and  
excellence, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 

For further information, visit www.collegeboard.com 

Copyright © 2003 College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams,  
APCD, Pacesetter, Pre-AP, SAT, Student Search Service, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board.  
AP Central is a trademark owned by the College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark jointly owned by the  
College Entrance Examination Board and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation. Educational Testing Service and ETS are registered trademarks of  
Educational Testing Service. Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. 

For the College Board’s online home for AP professionals, visit AP Central at apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® WORLD HISTORY 
2003 SCORING COMMENTARY 

Question 1 

Sample  

Score 

Commentary 

IK 

6 

IN 

8 

IP 

9 

Essay has a split thesis with cause emphasized in the introduction and  
consequence in the conclusion. The essay uses 8 of the 9 documents and has  
no major misinterpretations. It supports causes (Document 2) and consequences  
(Document 6). It groups (Documents 1 and 2) to support the assertion that  
Europeans justified their need for labor by a benign interpretation of indenture,  
explains the common factors resulting in Asian laborers’ migratory patterns  
(Documents 3 and 4) and contrasts the claims made in Document 7 with the  
experience of indentured laborers (Documents 5 and 8).  It requests a “first hand  
account” of an indentured servant, which is already included in the documents,  
but also requests “an account of a servant once they were free.”  No point of  
view is identified. 

The essay has a well-constructed thesis, uses all of the documents, and correctly  
interprets them.  It supports both causes and consequences with evidence from  
the documents.  The essay effectively analyzes point of view in three documents  
(2, 7, and 8).  It groups documents to demonstrate the movement of Asian  
peoples (Documents 3, 4, 6, and 9) and the “deplorable conditions” (Documents  
5, 7, and 8).  It requests a female perspective as an additional document. 

The essay has a complex thesis statement that addresses causation (an  
economically driven shift from slave to indentured labor), and consequences  
(shift in the geographic origins of labor and changes in the working conditions  
of plantation laborers).  It uses all the documents effectively with no  
misunderstandings. It supports both cause and consequence with documentary  
evidence and has numerous examples of sophisticated understanding of point of  
view.  Three groups are analyzed:  the status and condition of indentured  
laborers (Documents 1, 5, 7, and 8); the origins of indentured servitude  
(Documents 2, 6, and 3); and a shift from African to Asian labor supplies  
(Documents 3, 4, and 9).  The request for additional documents includes letters  
from Asian governments regarding the exportation of their labor forces and a  
personal diary of an indentured servant. 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available at apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® WORLD HISTORY 
2003 SCORING COMMENTARY 

Question 2 

Sample  

Score 

Commentary 

 DDD 

 CCC 

 GGG 

6 

7 

9 

The thesis establishes a chronological break in the nature of Islamic impact. The  
essay addresses cultural, economic, and political aspects with weak though  
adequate evidence.  Continuity is shown through references to Catholicism and  
religious tension.  Meets the basic core requirement but does not move into the  
expanded core. 

The essay has an adequate thesis that emerges more clearly in the conclusion.  It  
clearly addresses cultural, political and economic aspects though it does contain  
a few historical inaccuracies.  Good global context and specific evidence to  
support claims, receiving 1 expanded core point. 

The essay meets the requirements for the basic core.  It clearly exceeded the core  
by communicating a clear sense of chronology and global context.  The essay  
also excelled in making comparisons and connections on a global scale.  The  
essay received 3 expanded core points. 

Sample  

Score 

Commentary 

Question 3 

  SS 

  U 

  RR 

6 

7 

9 

The essay has an acceptable thesis and addresses all parts of the question. Two  
pieces of evidence are given for each region and the essay has one direct  
comparison.  Thus the essay achieved the basic core of 6 points. 

The essay meets the basic core requirements for 6 points.  In addition, the essay  
received an expanded core point for its analysis of causes. 

The essay meets the basic core requirements for 6 points.  In addition, the essay  
received two expanded core points for global context, analytical thesis, and  
additional evidence. 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available at apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
