APﬁ World History
2002 Free-Response Questions 

The materials included in these files are intended for use by AP teachers for course  
and exam preparation in the classroom; permission for any other use must be  
sought from the Advanced Placement Programﬁ. Teachers may reproduce them, in 
whole or in part, in limited quantities, for face-to-face teaching purposes but may  
not mass distribute the materials, electronically or otherwise. These materials and  
any copies made of them may not be resold, and the copyright notices must be  
retained as they appear here. This permission does not apply to any third-party 
copyrights contained herein. 

These materials were produced by Educational Testing Serviceﬁ (ETSﬁ), which develops and administers the examinations of the Advanced Placement  
Program for the College Board. The College Board and Educational Testing Service (ETS) are dedicated to the principle of equal opportunity, and their  
programs, services, and employment policies are guided by that principle. 

The College Board is a national nonprofit membership association dedicated to preparing, inspiring, and connecting students to college and opportunity.  
Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,200 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the  
College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 22,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges, through major programs and services in  
college admission, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SATﬁ, the  
PSAT/NMSQTﬁ, and the Advanced Placement Programﬁ (APﬁ). The College Board is committed to the principles of equity and  
excellence, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 

Copyright ' 2002 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, SAT, and the acorn logo  
are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. APIEL is a trademark owned by the College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a 
registered trademark jointly owned by the College Entrance Examination Board and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation.  
Educational Testing Service and ETS are registered trademarks of Educational Testing Service. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2002 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 
Part A 
(Suggested writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-7. (The documents have been 
edited for the purpose of this exercise.) Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. 

This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. Write an essay that: 
  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with evidence from the documents. 
  • Uses all or all but one of the documents. 
  • Analyzes the documents by grouping them in as many appropriate ways as possible. Does not simply 

summarize the documents individually. 

  • Takes into account both the sources of the documents and the authors’ points of view. 

You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 

 1.  Using the documents, compare and contrast the attitudes of Christianity and Islam 
toward merchants and trade from the religions’ origins until about 1500. Are there 
indications of change over time in either case, or both? What kinds of additional 
documents would you need to assess the consequences of these attitudes on merchant 
activities? 

Source:  Christian Bible, New Testament (Matthew), about 70-80 C.E 

Document 1

Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter 
into the kingdom of heaven. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the 
eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 

Copyright © 2002 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Advanced Placement Program and AP are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. 

2

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2002 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Source:  Muslim Qur’an, about 620-650 C.E. 

Document 2

O ye believers! devour not each other’s property among yourselves unlawfully save that be 
trading by mutual consent.  

Woe to the cheaters! who, when they take measure of their dues from men, take it fully; and 
when they measure out to others or weigh out for them, they give less than is due. 

And give full measure when you measure out and weigh with true balance. This is fair and 
better in the end. 

If the two parties speak the truth and make it manifest, their transaction shall be blessed, and 
if they conceal and tell a lie, the blessing of their transaction shall be obliterated. 

On the day of judgment, the honest, truthful Muslim merchant will take rank with the martyrs 
of the faith. 

Document 3

Source:  Reginald, monk of Durham, younger contemporary and colleague of St. Godric, 
The Life of St. Godric (a twelfth-century British merchant), written before St. Godric’s death 
in 1170. 

He chose not to follow the life of a husbandman, but rather to study, learn and exercise the 
rudiment of more subtle conceptions. For this reason, aspiring to the merchant’s trade, he 
began to follow the chapman’s [peddler’s] way of life, first learning how to gain in small 
bargains and things of insignificant price; and to gain from things of greater expense. 

Thus aspiring ever higher and higher, and yearning upward with his whole heart, at length his 
great labors and cares bore much fruit of worldly gain. For he labored not only as a merchant 
but also as a shipman to Denmark and Flanders and Scotland; in all which lands he found 
certain rare, and therefore more precious, wares, which he carried to other parts wherein he 
knew them to be least familiar, and coveted by the inhabitants beyond the price of gold itself; 
wherefore he exchanged these wares for others coveted by men of other lands; and thus 
chaffered [bargained] most freely and assiduously. Hence he made great profit in all his 
bargains, and gathered much wealth in the sweat of his brow; for he sold dear in one place the 
wares which he had bought elsewhere at a small price.  [But later] he began to yearn for 
solitude, and to hold his merchandise in less esteem than heretofore. 

And now he had lived sixteen years as a merchant, and began to think of spending on charity, 
to God’s honor and service, the goods which he had so laboriously acquired. He therefore took 
the cross as a pilgrim to Jerusalem. 

Godric was now already firmly disposed to give himself entirely to God’s service. Wherefore, 
that he might follow Christ the more freely, he sold all his possessions and distributed them 
among the poor. For above all things he coveted the life of a hermit. 

Copyright © 2002 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Advanced Placement Program and AP are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. 

3

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2002 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 4

Source:  Thomas Aquinas, leading Scholastic theologian, Summa Theologica, 1273. 

It is written (Matthew vii. 12):  All things . . . whatsoever you would that men should do to you, 
do you also to them. But no man wishes to buy a thing for more than its worth. Therefore no 
man should sell a thing to another man for more than its worth. 

I answer that it is altogether sinful to have recourse to deceit in order to sell a thing for more 
than its just price, because this is to deceive one’s neighbor so as to injure him. Hence Tully 
[Cicero, the Roman writer] says:  Contracts should be entirely free from double-dealing:  the 
seller must not impose upon the bidder, nor the buyer upon one that bids against him. 

Therefore if either the price exceed the quantity of the thing’s worth, or, conversely, the thing 
exceed the price, there is no longer the equality of justice:  and consequently, to sell a thing for 
more than its worth, or to buy it for less than its worth, is in itself unjust and unlawful. 

Now no man should sell what is not his, though he may charge for the loss he suffers. 

Document 5

Source:  Ibn Khaldun, leading Muslim scholar, Universal History (Kitab al-ibar), fourteenth 
century. 

Commerce is the increasing of capital by buying goods and attempting to sell them at a price 
higher than their cost. This is done either by waiting for a rise in the market price; or by 
transporting the goods to another place where they are more keenly demanded and therefore 
fetch a higher price; or, lastly, by selling them on a long-term credit basis. Commercial profit 
is small, relatively to the capital invested, but if the capital is large, even a low rate of profit 
will produce a large total gain. 

In order to achieve this increase in capital, it is necessary to have enough initial capital to pay 
in cash the sellers from whom one buys goods; it is also necessary to sell for cash, as honesty 
is not widespread among people. This dishonesty leads on the one hand to fraud and the 
adulteration of goods, and on the other to delays on payment which diminish profits because 
capital remains idle during the interval. It also induces buyers to repudiate their debts, a 
practice which is very injurious to the merchant’s capital. 

The manners of tradesmen are inferior to those of rulers, and far removed from manliness 
and uprightness. We have already stated that traders must buy and sell and seek profits. This 
necessitates flattery, and evasiveness, litigation and disputation, all of which are characteristic 
of this profession. And these qualities lead to a decrease and weakening in virtue and man-
liness. For these acts inevitably affect the soul. 

As for Trade, although it be a natural means of livelihood, yet most of the methods it employs 
are tricks aimed at making a profit by securing the difference between the buying and selling 
prices, and by appropriating the surplus. This is why [religious] Law allows the use of such 
methods, which, although they come under the heading of gambling, yet do not constitute the 
taking without return of other people’s goods. 

Copyright © 2002 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Advanced Placement Program and AP are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. 

4

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2002 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 6

Source:  Letters to and from Italian merchants in the fourteenth-century. 

A. Letters ordering religious paintings for sale. 

A panel of Our Lady on a background of fine gold with two doors, making a fine show with 
good and handsome figures by the best painter. Let there be in the center Our Lord on the 
Cross, or Our Lady, whomsoever you find—I care not, so that the figures be handsome and 
large, the best and finest you can purvey, and the cost no more than 5½ or 6½ florins.  

You tell me you can find no pictures for the money we will pay, for there are none so cheap, 
and therefore we bid you, if you find no good things at a fair cost, leave them, for here there is 
no great demand. They should be bought when the master artist who makes them is in need. 

B. Letter from a merchant’s mother. 

You know God has granted you to acquire great riches in this world, may He be praised; and 
you have borne, and are bearing, great burdens. Pray toil not so hard, only for the good of 
strangers; let some remembrance of you remain here and someone to pray God on your behalf. 
Crave not for all; you have already enough to suffice you! 

C. Letter placing an order for English wool. 

You say you have writ to Venice to remit us 1000 ducats with which, in the name of God and 
profit, you would have us buy Cotswold wool. With God always before us, we will carry out 
your bidding. 

Document 7

Source:  Islamic court decision, Ankara, seventeenth century but representative of Turkish 
guild practices in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. 

[The content of this document] is that (cid:1)ah Mehmed and Haci Mehmed and others from the 
weavers’ guild summoned [to court] Sakaoglu Nasuh from the said guild and said in 
complaint:  “Whenever cotton yarn comes to [town], the aforementioned arrives, pays an 
extra price, and takes it from its owner, and the other weavers remain deprived [of cotton 
yarn]. As of old, when cotton yarn came, we all bought it together. The aforementioned has 
now acted contrary to the old custom; we do not agree to this.” The aforementioned was 
warned emphatically that when cotton yarn comes once more he should not buy it alone, 
but rather that it should be distributed among all. Whereupon the aforementioned took it 
upon himself to behave in the manner said. 

END OF PART A 

Copyright © 2002 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Advanced Placement Program and AP are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. 

5

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2002 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 
Part B 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 
Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Uses historical context to show change over time and/or continuities. 

 2.  Choose TWO of the areas listed below and analyze how each area’s relationship to 

global trade patterns changed from 1750 to the present. Be sure to describe each area’s 
involvement in global patterns around 1750 as your starting point.

Latin America 

East Asia 

Eastern Europe 

South and Southeast Asia 

Sub-Saharan Africa 

The Middle East 

North America 

Part C 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 
Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Makes direct, relevant comparisons. 

 3.  Analyze and compare the differing responses of China and Japan to western 

penetration in the nineteenth century. 

END OF EXAMINATION 

Copyright © 2002 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved.  
Advanced Placement Program and AP are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board. 

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
