AP® World History 
2006 Free-Response Questions 

The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success  

The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and 
opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other 
educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 
3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and 
teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement 
Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied 
in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 

© 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, AP Central, APCD, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP 
Vertical Teams, Pre-AP, SAT, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. Admitted Class Evaluation 
Service, CollegeEd, connect to college success, MyRoad, SAT Professional Development, SAT Readiness Program, and Setting the 
Cornerstones are trademarks owned by the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and 
National Merit Scholarship Corporation. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. 
Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: 
www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. 
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 

Note:  This exam uses the chronological designations B.C.E. (before the common era) and C.E. (common era).  
These labels correspond to B.C. (before Christ) and A.D. (anno Domini), which are used in some world history 
textbooks. 

Part A 
(Suggested writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-8. The documents have been edited 
for the purpose of this exercise. Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. 

This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. 

Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with evidence from the documents. 
  • Uses all of the documents. 
  • Analyzes the documents by grouping them in as many appropriate ways as possible. Does not simply  

summarize the documents individually. 

  • Takes into account the sources of the documents and analyzes the authors’ points of view. 
  • Explains the need for at least one additional type of document. 

You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 

© 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

2 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

 1.  Using the documents, analyze the social and economic effects of the global flow of 
silver from the mid-sixteenth century to the early eighteenth century. Explain how 
another type of document would help you analyze the effects of the flow of silver 
bullion in this period. 

  Historical Background:  Spanish colonial America and Tokugawa Japan led the 

world in silver production from 1500 to 1750. In the early 1570’s, the Ming Chinese 
government required that all domestic taxes and trade fees be paid in silver. 

© 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

3 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 1 

Source:  Ye Chunji, county official during the Ming dynasty, order issued to 
limit wedding expenses, 1570’s. 

The frugal man with only one bar of silver currency can have something left 
over, whereas the extravagant man with a thousand can still not have enough. 

Document 2 

Source:  Tomás de Mercado, Spanish scholar, Manual of Deals and Contracts, 
Seville, 1571. 

High prices ruined Spain as the prices attracted Asian commodities and the 
silver currency flowed out to pay for them. The streets of Manila in the Spanish 
territory of the Philippines could be paved with granite cobblestones brought 
from China as ballast* in Chinese ships coming to get silver for China. 

*A heavy substance used to improve the stability of a ship. 

Document 3 

Source:  Wang Xijue, Ming dynasty court official, report to the emperor, 1593. 

The venerable elders of my home district explain that the reason grain is cheap 
despite poor harvests in recent years is due entirely to the scarcity of silver coin. 
The national government requires silver for taxes but disburses little silver in its 
expenditures. As the price of grain falls, tillers of the soil receive lower returns 
on their labors, and thus less land is put into cultivation. 

Document 4 

Source:  Ralph Fitch, British merchant, an account of his travels to the East 
Indies, published in 1599. 

When the Portuguese go from Macao, the most southern port city in China, to 
Japan, they carry much white silk, gold, perfume, and porcelain and they bring 
from Japan nothing but silver. They have a great ship that goes to Japan every 
year, and brings back more than 600,000 coins’ worth of Japanese silver. The 
Portuguese use this Japanese silver to their great advantage in China. The 
Portuguese bring from China gold, perfume, silk, copper, porcelain, and many 
other luxury goods. 

© 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

4 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 5 

Source:  Xu Dunqiu Ming, writer, in his essay in The Changing Times, about the 
commercial city of Hangzhou, 1610. 

In the past, the dye shops would allow customers to have several dozen pieces of 
cloth dyed before settling accounts and charging the customers. Moreover, 
customers could pay for dying the cloth with rice, wheat, soybeans, chickens, or 
other fowl. Now, when you have your cloth dyed you receive a bill, which must 
be paid with silver obtained from a moneylender. 

Document 6 

Source:  Antonio Vázquez de Espinosa, a Spanish priest, Compendium and 
Description of the West Indies, 1620’s. 

The ore at Potosí silver mine is very rich black flint, and the excavation so 
extensive that more than 3,000 Indians worked away hard with picks and 
hammers, breaking up that flint ore; and when they have filled their little sacks, 
the poor fellows, loaded down with ore, climb up those ladders or rigging, some 
like masts and others like cables, and so trying and distressing that even an 
empty-handed man can hardly get up them. 

So huge is the wealth that has been taken out of this range since the year 1545, 
when it was discovered, up to the present year of 1628, that merely from the 
registered mines, according to most of the accounts in the Spanish royal records, 
326,000,000 silver coins have been taken out. 

This does not count the great amount of silver taken secretly from these mines to 
Spain, paying no 20 percent tax or registry fee, and to other countries outside 
Spain, including the Philippines and China. 

Document 7 

Source:  He Qiaoyuan, Ming dynasty court official, report to the emperor on the 
possibility of repealing the 1626 ban on foreign trade, 1630. 

The Spanish have silver mountains, which they mint into silver coins. When 
Chinese merchants trade in Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean, they trade the 
goods we produce for the goods of others. But when they go to Luzon 
(Philippines) they only return with silver coins. Chinese silk yarn worth 100 bars 
of silver can be sold in the Philippines at a price of 200 to 300 bars of silver 
there. Moreover, porcelain from the official pottery works as well as sugar and 
fruit from my native province, are currently desired by the foreigners. 

© 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

5 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 8 

Source:  Charles D’Avenant, an English scholar, “An Essay on the East-India 
Trade” regarding the debate on a bill in Parliament to restrict Indian textiles, 
1697. 

Since we were supplanted in the spice-trade by the Dutch, our chief investments 
or importations from the East Indies have been in dyed cotton cloth, silks, drugs, 
cotton-yarn, and wool; part of which commodities are for our own use, but a 
much greater part, in times of peace, were brought to London for sale to France, 
Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Italy, and our colonies. 

For Europe draws from Asia nothing of solid use; only materials to supply 
luxury, and only perishable commodities, but sends to Asia gold and silver, 
which is there buried and never returns. 

But since Europe has tasted of this luxury, since the custom of a hundred years 
has made Asian spices seem necessary to all degrees of people, since Asian silks 
are pleasing everywhere to the better sort, and since their dyed cotton cloth is 
useful wear at home, and in our own colonies, and for the Spaniards in America, 
it can never be advisable for England to quit this trade, and leave it to any other 
nation. 

END OF PART A 

© 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 
Part B 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 

Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Uses world historical context to show change over time and/or continuities. 
  • Analyzes the process of change over time and/or continuity. 

 2.  Analyze the cultural and political changes and continuities in ONE of the following 

civilizations during the last centuries of the classical era. 

Chinese, 100 C.E. to 600 C.E. 

Roman, 100 C.E. to 600 C.E. 

Indian, 300 C.E. to 600 C.E. 

© 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

7 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Part C 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 

Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Makes direct, relevant comparisons. 
  • Analyzes relevant reasons for similarities and differences. 

 3.  Compare and contrast the goals and outcomes of the revolutionary process in TWO of 

the following countries, beginning with the dates specified. 

Mexico 

1910 

China 

1911 

Russia 

1917 

STOP 

END OF EXAM 

© 2006 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
