AP® World History
2003 Free-Response Questions 

The materials included in these files are intended for use by AP teachers   
for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use must be  
sought from the Advanced Placement Program®. Teachers may reproduce them, in 
whole or in part, in limited quantities for noncommercial, face-to-face teaching 
purposes. This permission does not apply to any third-party copyrights contained 
herein. This material may not be mass distributed, electronically or otherwise.  
These materials and any copies made of them may not be resold, and the   
copyright notices must be retained as they appear here. 

These materials were produced by Educational Testing Service® (ETS®), which develops and administers the examinations of the Advanced Placement  
Program for the College Board. The College Board and Educational Testing Service (ETS) are dedicated to the principle of equal opportunity, and their  
programs, services, and employment policies are guided by that principle. 

The College Board is a national nonprofit membership association whose mission is to prepare, inspire, and connect students to college and opportunity.  
Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,300 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the   
College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 22,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in  
college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the  
PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of equity and  
excellence, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 

For further information, visit www.collegeboard.com 

Copyright © 2003 College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Vertical Teams,  
APCD, Pacesetter, Pre-AP, SAT, Student Search Service, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Entrance Examination Board.  
AP Central is a trademark owned by the College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark jointly owned by the  
College Entrance Examination Board and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation. Educational Testing Service and ETS are registered trademarks of  
Educational Testing Service. Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. 

For the College Board’s online home for AP professionals, visit AP Central at apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 
Part A 
(Suggested writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-9. The documents have been edited 
for the purpose of this exercise. Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. 

This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. Write an essay that: 
  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with evidence from the documents. 
  • Uses all or all but one of the documents. 
  • Analyzes the documents by grouping them in as many appropriate ways as possible. Does not simply 

summarize the documents individually. 

  • Takes into account both the sources of the documents and the authors’ points of view. 

You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 

 1.  Using the documents, analyze the main features, including causes and consequences, 
of the system of indentured servitude that developed as part of global economic 
changes in the nineteenth and into the twentieth centuries. What additional kind 
of document(s) would help assess the historical significance of indentured servitude 
in this period? 

  Historical Background:  Indentured servitude, employed in the seventeenth and 

eighteenth centuries to recruit labor from western Europe for North America, was 
revived in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, particularly after the success 
of antislavery movements in the 1800’s. 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to  
students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 

2 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 1

Source:  Herman Merivale, British Undersecretary of the Colonies, 1850’s. 

Indentured laborers are not voluntary immigrants in the ordinary sense, led by spontaneous 
desire of bettering their conditions; they are not slaves, seized by violence, brought over in 
fetters, and working under the lash. They have been raised, not without effort, like recruits 
for the military service. 

Document 2

Source:  Editorial in the Natal Mercury, Itongati, South Africa, on the visit of Sir George Grey, 
British colonial governor, June 6, 1855. 

A clause was introduced at the public meeting setting forth the necessity of an “importation 
of foreign labor” for the exigencies of our tropical industry, more especially of the sugar 
enterprise; unfortunately that clause was struck out by the Town Council. 

Next year, the quantity of labor that will be required to bring to a profitable result the large 
and increasing sugar cultivation now going on will be great beyond the possibility of its being 
supplied by our own natives, no matter how vigorous and how successful may be the measures 
of Government in the meantime for the better development of native industry. Every suc-
ceeding year, the demand for labor will increase in an almost geometrical ratio. In the island 
of Mauritius, there are not more than 60,000 acres under sugar cultivation, and for this small 
area—producing however, upwards of 100,000 tons of sugar annually,—not fewer than 
60,000 laborers are required. 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to  
students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 

3 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 3

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to  
students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 

4 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 4

Source:  Adapted from David Northrup, Indentured Labor in the Age of Imperialism, 
1834-1922, 1995. 

SELECTED INTERCONTINENTAL FLOWS OF INDENTURED OR 
CONTRACT LABOR, NINETEENTH AND EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY 

Origins 

India to 

Destinations 

Totals (rounded) 

British Guiana 
Trinidad 
Other Caribbean 
Suriname (Dutch Guiana) 
Mauritius 
Fiji 
South Africa 

China to 

Peru 
Cuba  
Other Caribbean 
Hawaii 

Japan to 

Hawaii 
Peru 

239,000 
150,000 
130,000 
  34,000 
455,000 
  61,000 
153,000 

117,000 
138,000 
  24,000 
  34,000 

  65,000 
  18,000 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to  
students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 

5 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 5

Source:  Newly arrived Asian Indian indentured laborers awaiting assignment 
to work on sugar plantations, Suriname (Dutch Guiana), 1885.  

Photo and print collection of the Koninklijk Instituut voor Tall-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 
Leiden. Julius Eduard Muller, photographer. 

Source:  Asian Indian laborers harvesting sugar cane and European supervisor, 
Suriname (Dutch Guiana), 1920. 

Photo and print collection of the Koninklijk Instituut voor Tall-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 
Leiden. Julius Eduard Muller, photographer. 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to  
students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 

6 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 6

Source:  “General Statement of Asian Indian Immigration to Mauritius,” published by 
the British Government, 1949. 

FORMER SLAVES AND ASIAN INDIANS IN MAURITIUS, 1835-1851 

Former Slaves 

Asian Indians 

Year  Male 

Female 

Male 

Male and Female 

Female 

1835 
1837 
1846 
1848 
1851 

36,500 
32,700 
28,100 
28,200 
26,700 

24,500 
19,900 
21,200 
21,700 
21,700 

48,900 
47,000 
64,300 

  1,300 
11,700 

  7,300 
  9,300 
13,700 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to  
students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 

7 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Source:  British Guiana Indenture Agreement, 1895. 

Document 7

CONDITIONS OF SERVICE AND TERMS OF AGREEMENT WHICH THE RECRUITER 
IS AUTHORIZED TO OFFER ON BEHALF OF THE AGENT TO INTENDING 
EMIGRANTS. 

Period of Service:  Five years from date of allotment 

Nature of Labor:  Work in connection with the cultivation of the soil or the manufacture of 
the produce on any plantation. 

Number of Days on which the Emigrant is Required to Labor in Each Week:  Every day, 
except Sundays and authorized holidays. 

Number of Hours in each Day during which Emigrant is Required to Labor without 
Extra Remuneration:  Seven hours in the fields or ten hours in the factory buildings. 

Monthly or Daily Wages or Task Work Rates. 
Able-bodied adult of and above sixteen years of age, shall be paid one shilling for each day’s 
work. Adult males, not able bodied, or minors (10-16), or females shall be paid 2/3’s of a 
shilling for each day’s work. 

Condition as to Return Passage. 
The emigrant on completing a continuous residence of ten years in British Guiana, and 
becoming entitled to a certificate of exemption from labor, shall, with family, if any, be 
provided with a free return passage back to Calcutta. After completing a continuous residence 
of five years and becoming entitled to a certificate of exemption from labor, the emigrant may 
return to India at his own cost. Blankets and warm clothing are supplied gratis on leaving India 
but not for the return voyage. 

Other Conditions. 
Rations shall be provided for the emigrant and family, if any, by the employer for three 
calendar months following the date of allotment, according to the scale sanctioned by the 
Government of British Guiana.  

A suitable dwelling shall be assigned to the emigrant and family, if any, free of rent, and shall 
be kept in good repair by the employer; medicines, comforts, medical attendance, hospital 
accommodation and appropriate diet when sick shall be provided free of cost. 

I agree to accept the person named on the face of this form on the above conditions. 

Recruiter for British Guiana. 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to  
students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 

8 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 8

Source:  Documents of Indentured Labour, South Africa, 1851-1917. 

Office of the Protector of Immigrants 
Ramana, Indentured to T.T. Poynton states: 
I complain that I am not allowed proper time to eat my meals during the day. I have to 
commence work at about 5:30 in the morning and finish off about 8:30 p.m. daily. I work 
on Sundays up to 2 o’clock. 

I am overworked and the wages paid me is not sufficient. 

Whenever I stop away for a day in a month, it is deducted from my pay and I am told by my 
master that I will have to make up these days at the expiration of my indenture. 

Ramana,   X 

(His Mark) 

Source:  Statistics from various official government records. 

Document 9

SHARE OF TOTAL POPULATION IN SELECTED TERRITORIES 
DERIVING FROM INDENTURED MIGRATION 

Groups 

1920-1921 

Asian Indians in Mauritius 

Asian Indians in Trinidad 

Asian Indians in British Guiana 

Asian Indians in Fiji 

Japanese in Hawaii 

Chinese in Hawaii 

71% 

33% 

42% 

40% 

43% 

9% 

END OF PART A 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to  
students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2003 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 
Part B 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 
Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Uses historical context to show change over time and/or continuities. 

 2.  Describe and analyze the cultural, economic, and political impact of Islam on ONE of 
the following regions between 1000 C.E. and 1750 C.E. Be sure to discuss continuities 
as well as changes. 

West Africa 
South Asia 
Europe 

Part C 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 
Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Makes direct, relevant comparisons. 

 3.  Compare and contrast the roles of women in TWO of the following regions during the 

period from 1750 to 1914. 

East Asia 
Latin America 

Sub-Saharan Africa 
Western Europe 

END OF EXAMINATION 

Copyright © 2003 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Available to AP professionals at apcentral.collegeboard.com and to  
students and parents at www.collegeboard.com/apstudents. 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
