AP® 

World History

2004 Free-Response Questions 

The materials included in these files are intended for noncommercial use by  
AP teachers for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use  
must be sought from the Advanced Placement Program®. Teachers may  
reproduce them, in whole or in part, in limited quantities, for face-to-face 
teaching purposes but may not mass distribute the materials,  
electronically or otherwise. This permission does not apply to any  
third-party copyrights contained herein. These materials and any copies  
made of them may not be resold, and the copyright notices  
must be retained as they appear here. 

The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity.  
Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,500 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the  
College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in  
college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the  
PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of  
excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 

For further information, visit www.collegeboard.com 

Copyright © 2004 College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central,  
AP Vertical Teams, APCD, Pacesetter, Pre-AP, SAT, Student Search Service, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the  
College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark jointly owned by the  
College Entrance Examination Board and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation.  
Educational Testing Service and ETS are registered trademarks of Educational Testing Service.  
Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. 

For the College Board’s online home for AP professionals, visit AP Central at apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2004 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 

Note:  This examination uses the chronological designations B.C.E. (before the common era) and C.E. (common era). 
These labels correspond to B.C. (before Christ) and A.D. (anno Domini), which are used in some world history 
textbooks. 

Part A 
(Suggested writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-6. The documents have been edited 
for the purpose of this exercise. Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. 

This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. Write an essay that: 
  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with evidence from the documents. 
  • Uses all or all but one of the documents. 
  • Analyzes the documents by grouping them in as many appropriate ways as possible. Does not simply 

summarize the documents individually. 

  • Takes into account both the sources of the documents and the authors’ points of view. 

You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 

 1.  Based on the following documents, analyze the responses to the spread of Buddhism in 
China. What additional kind of document(s) would you need to evaluate the extent of 
Buddhism’s appeal  in China? 

  Historical Background:  Buddhism, founded in India in the sixth century B.C.E., was 
brought to China by the first century C.E., gradually winning converts following the 
collapse of the Han  dynasty in 220 C.E.  Buddhist influence continued to expand for 
several centuries.  Between 220 C.E.  and 570 C.E., China experienced a period of 
political instability and disunity.  After 570 C.E., the   imperial structure was restored.  

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

2 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2004 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 1

Source:  According to Buddhist tradition, “The Four Noble Truths,” the first sermon preached 
by the Buddha (563 B.C.E.-483 B.C.E.), India, fifth century B.C.E. 

The First Noble Truth is the Noble Truth of Sorrow. Birth is sorrow, age is sorrow, disease is 
sorrow, death is sorrow, contact with the unpleasant is sorrow, separation from the pleasant is 
sorrow, every wish unfulfilled is sorrow. 

The Second Noble Truth is the Noble Truth of the Arising of Sorrow; it arises from craving, 
which leads to rebirth, which brings delight and passion, and seeks pleasure—the craving for 
sensual pleasure, the craving for continued life, and the craving for power. 

The Third Noble Truth is the Noble Truth of the Stopping of Sorrow. It is the complete 
stopping of that craving, so that no passion remains, leaving it, being emancipated from  
it, being released from it, giving no place to it. 

The Fourth Noble Truth is the Noble Truth of the Way that Leads to the Stopping of Sorrow. 

Document 2

Source:  Zhi Dun, Chinese scholar, author, and confidant of Chinese aristocrats and high 
officials during the period when northern China was invaded by central Asian steppe nomads, 
circa 350 C.E. 

Whosoever in China, in this era of sensual pleasures, serves the Buddha and correctly observes 
the commandments, who recites the Buddhist Scriptures, and who furthermore makes a vow to 
be reborn without ever abandoning his sincere intention, will at the end of his life, when his 
soul passes away, be miraculously transported thither. He will behold the Buddha and be 
enlightened in his spirit, and then he will enter Nirvana. * 

*Nirvana:  the extinction of desire and individual consciousness 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

3 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2004 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 3

Source:  Anonymous Chinese scholar, “The Disposition of Error,” China, circa 500 C.E.  

Question:  If Buddhism is the greatest and most venerable of ways, why did the great sages of 
the past and Confucius not practice it? In the Confucian Classics no one mentions it. Why, 
then, do you love the Way of the Buddha and rejoice in outlandish arts? Can the writings of  
the Buddha exceed the Classics and commentaries and beautify the accomplishments of the 
sages? 

Answer:  All written works need not necessarily be the words of Confucius. To compare  
the sages to the Buddha would be like comparing a white deer to a unicorn, or a swallow to  
a phoenix. The records and teachings of the Confucian classics do not contain everything. 
Even if the Buddha is not mentioned in them, what occasion is there for suspicion? 

Question:  Now of happiness there is none greater than the continuation of one’s line, of 
unfilial conduct there is none worse than childlessness. The monks forsake wives and children, 
reject property and wealth. Some do not marry all their lives.  

Answer:  Wives, children, and property are the luxuries of the world, but simple living and 
inaction are the wonders of the Way. The monk practices the Way and substitutes that for 
worldly pleasures. He accumulates goodness and wisdom in exchange for the joys of having 
a wife and children. 

Document 4

Source:  Han Yu, leading Confucian scholar and official at the Tang imperial court, “Memorial 
on Buddhism,” 819 C.E. 

Your servant begs leave to say that Buddhism is no more than a cult of the barbarian peoples 
spread to China. It did not exist here in ancient times. 

Now I hear that Your Majesty has ordered the community of monks to go to greet the finger 
bone of the Buddha [a relic brought to China from India], and that Your Majesty will ascend a 
tower to watch the procession as this relic is brought into the palace. If these practices are not 
stopped, and this relic of the Buddha is allowed to be carried from one temple to another, there 
will be those in the crowd who will cut off their arms and mutilate their flesh in offering to the 
Buddha. 

Now the Buddha was a man of the barbarians who did not speak Chinese and who wore 
clothes of a different fashion. The Buddha’s sayings contain nothing about our ancient kings 
and the Buddha’s manner of dress did not conform to our laws; he understood neither the 
duties that bind sovereign and subject, nor the affections of father and son. If the Buddha were 
still alive today and came to our court, Your Majesty might condescend to receive him, but he 
would then be escorted to the borders of the nation, dismissed, and not allowed to delude the 
masses. How then, when he has long been dead, could the Buddha’s rotten bones, the foul and 
unlucky remains of his body, be rightly admitted to the palace? Confucius said:  “Respect 
ghosts and spirits, but keep them at a distance!” Your servant is deeply ashamed and begs that 
this bone from the Buddha be given to the proper authorities to be cast into fire and water, that 
this evil be rooted out, and later generations spared this delusion. 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

4 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2004 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 5

Source:  Zong Mi, a leading Buddhist scholar, favored by the Tang imperial household, essay, 
“On the Nature of Man,” early ninth century C.E. 

Confucius, Laozi and the Buddha were perfect sages. They established their teachings 
according to the demands of the age and the needs of various beings. They differ in their 
approaches in that they encourage the perfection of good deeds, punish wicked ones, and 
reward good ones; all three teachings lead to the creation of an orderly society and for this  
they must be observed with respect. 

Source:  Tang Emperor Wu, Edict on Buddhism, 845 C.E. 

Document 6

We have heard that the Buddha was never spoken of before the Han dynasty; from then on the 
religion of idols gradually came to prominence. So in this latter age Buddhism has transmitted 
its strange ways and has spread like a luxuriant vine until it has poisoned the customs of our 
nation. Buddhism has spread to all the nine provinces of China; each day finds its monks and 
followers growing more numerous and its temples more lofty. Buddhism wears out the 
people’s strength, pilfers their wealth, causes people to abandon their lords and parents for the 
company of teachers, and severs man and wife with its monastic decrees. In destroying law 
and injuring humankind indeed nothing surpasses this doctrine! 

Now if even one man fails to work the fields, someone must go hungry; if one woman does  
not tend her silkworms, someone will go cold. At present there are an inestimable number  
of monks and nuns in the empire, all of them waiting for the farmers to feed them and the 
silkworms to clothe them while the Buddhist public temples and private chapels have reached 
boundless numbers, sufficient to outshine the imperial palace itself. 

Having thoroughly examined all earlier reports and consulted public opinion on all sides, there 
no longer remains the slightest doubt in Our mind that this evil should be eradicated. 

END OF PART A 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2004 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 
Part B 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 
Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Uses historical context to show change over time and/or continuities. 

 2.  Analyze the changes and continuities in labor systems between 1750 and 1914 in ONE 
of the following areas. In your analysis, be sure to discuss the causes of the changes 
and the reasons for the continuities. 

Latin America and the Caribbean 

Russia 

Sub-Saharan Africa 

Part C 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 
Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Makes direct, relevant comparisons. 

 3.  Compare and contrast how the First World War and its outcomes affected TWO of  

the following regions in the period from the war through the 1930’s. 

East Asia 

Middle East 

South Asia (Indian subcontinent) 

END OF EXAMINATION 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for AP students and parents). 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
