AP® World History
2004 Scoring Commentary 

The materials included in these files are intended for noncommercial use by  
AP teachers for course and exam preparation; permission for any other use  
must be sought from the Advanced Placement Program®. Teachers may  
reproduce them, in whole or in part, in limited quantities, for face-to-face 
teaching purposes but may not mass distribute the materials,  
electronically or otherwise. This permission does not apply to any  
third-party copyrights contained herein. These materials and any copies  
made of them may not be resold, and the copyright notices  
must be retained as they appear here. 

The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and opportunity.  
Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 4,500 schools, colleges, universities, and other educational organizations. Each year, the  
College Board serves over three million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 3,500 colleges through major programs and services in  
college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the  
PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of  
excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 

For further information, visit www.collegeboard.com 

Copyright © 2004 College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central,  
AP Vertical Teams, APCD, Pacesetter, Pre-AP, SAT, Student Search Service, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks of the  
College Entrance Examination Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the  
College Entrance Examination Board and National Merit Scholarship Corporation.  
Educational Testing Service and ETS are registered trademarks of Educational Testing Service.  
Other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. 

For the College Board’s online home for AP professionals, visit AP Central at apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® WORLD HISTORY 
2004 SCORING COMMENTARY 

Question 1 

Sample: 1J 
Score: 6 

The essay has a thesis, though it is in the last paragraph.  It uses with understanding and analysis all but 
one of the documents.  Though point of view is mentioned several times, it is never specifically addressed 
in terms of these documents.  The essay explains the need for an appropriate additional document.  It 
achieved all but one of the basic core points for a score of 6. 

Sample: 1K  
Score: 9 

The essay achieves all of the seven basic core points.  The discussion of point of view for each document 
and straightforward document analysis earns two points in the expanded core for a score of 9. 

Sample: 1L 
Score: 9 

The essay is organized using a chronological approach.  It receives all seven points in the basic core and 
two expanded core points for its thorough use of thoughtful point of view and consistent analysis of the 
documents within their appropriate time period, for a total score of 9. 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® WORLD HISTORY 
2004 SCORING COMMENTARY 

Question 2 

Sample: 2HHH 
Score: 7 

This essay has an acceptable thesis in the first paragraph.  It addresses all parts of the question with 
continuity and analysis of change.  There are more than five pieces of evidence, and global context is 
discussed in two different places in the essay.  One point is given in the expanded core for the 
sophisticated way in which multiple labor systems in Latin America and the Caribbean are discussed, 
including the continuity of wage labor.  The essay received a score of 7. 

Sample: 2AAA 
Score: 8 

This essay has an analytical thesis that also discusses long-term impact in Russia.  It addresses all parts of 
the question with sophisticated analysis of change in several places in the essay.  There are multiple 
pieces of evidence, and global context is explained in more than one place.  Two points are given in the 
expanded core for demonstrating depth in analyzing causes for change and for long-term impact.  The 
essay received a score of 8. 

Sample: 2PPP 
Score: 9 

This essay meets all the core points for thesis, all parts of the question, evidence, and global context.  It 
was given three expanded core points for the strong thesis statement connecting a change in labor 
systems in sub-Saharan Africa to European conquest and colonization, for the depth and complexity of 
analysis of changes in labor systems, and for sophistication in supporting regional generalizations about 
labor systems with specific examples about Rhodesia and the Congo.  The essay received a score of 9. 

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® WORLD HISTORY 
2004 SCORING COMMENTARY 

Question 3 

Sample: 3F 
Score: 8 

The essay meets the basic core requirements with the thesis appearing in the final paragraph; it addresses 
the question in both East Asia and South Asia at several points throughout and offers a direct comparison, 
though it does contain a few inaccuracies.  It offers good direct comparisons and decent additional evidence, 
giving it two additional expanded core points for a total score of 8. 

Sample: 3C 
Score: 9 

The essay meets the basic core requirements.  It plainly exceeds the basic core by analyzing and discussing 
the similarities and differences between the Middle East and the Indian subcontinent while tracing the effect 
of the war through the entire period.  The essay also excelled in its sophisticated analysis of causes within 
and across regions and in the global context for a score of 9. 

Sample: 3D 
Score: 6 

The essay has an acceptable thesis and addresses all parts of the question.  The evidence that is given is 
quite explicit.  The substantiation of the direct comparison of the two regions is not particularly strong but is 
adequate to receive the basic core points for a score of 6.   

Copyright © 2004 by College Entrance Examination Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
