AP® World History 
2008 Free-Response Questions 

The College Board: Connecting Students to College Success  

The College Board is a not-for-profit membership association whose mission is to connect students to college success and 
opportunity. Founded in 1900, the association is composed of more than 5,000 schools, colleges, universities, and other 
educational organizations. Each year, the College Board serves seven million students and their parents, 23,000 high schools, and 
3,500 colleges through major programs and services in college admissions, guidance, assessment, financial aid, enrollment, and 
teaching and learning. Among its best-known programs are the SAT®, the PSAT/NMSQT®, and the Advanced Placement 
Program® (AP®). The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied 
in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 

© 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, SAT, and the 
acorn logo are registered trademarks of the College Board. PSAT/NMSQT is a registered trademark of the College Board and 
National Merit Scholarship Corporation.  
Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: 
www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html. 

Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.com. 
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.com. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 

Note:  This exam uses the chronological designations B.C.E. (before the common era) and C.E. (common era).  
These labels correspond to B.C. (before Christ) and A.D. (anno Domini), which are used in some world history 
textbooks. 

Part A 
(Suggested writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  The following question is based on the accompanying Documents 1-10. (The documents have been 
edited for the purpose of this exercise.) Write your answer on the lined pages of the Section II free-response booklet. 

This question is designed to test your ability to work with and understand historical documents. 

Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with evidence from the documents. 
  • Uses all of the documents. 
  • Analyzes the documents by grouping them in as many appropriate ways as possible. Does not simply  

summarize the documents individually. 

  • Takes into account the sources of the documents and analyzes the authors’ points of view. 
  • Identifies and explains the need for at least one additional type of document. 

You may refer to relevant historical information not mentioned in the documents. 

 1.  Based on the following documents, analyze factors that shaped the modern Olympic 

movement from 1892 to 2002. Identify and explain what additional type of 
document(s) or sources would help you assess these factors. 

  Historical Background:  The Olympic Games were athletic competitions held in 

Greece approximately every four years from 776 B.C.E. to 393 C.E. After several years 
of planning, the first modern Olympic Games were held in Athens in 1896. 

© 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

-2- 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 1 

Source:  Pierre de Coubertin, founder of the modern Olympic movement, speech to the 
Athletic Society of France, Paris, 1892. 

There are those who are called “utopians” because they speak of the disappearance of war, 
but there are others who speak of the reduction of the chances of war, and I do not see that 
as utopian. Through the Olympics let us export our oarsmen, our runners, and our fencers 
into other lands. That is the true free trade of the future; and the day it is introduced into 
Europe, the cause of peace will have received a new and strong ally. I ask for your help so 
that together we may attempt the splendid and beneficial task of reviving the Olympic 
Games. 

Document 2 

Source:  Sybil Newall, British competitor in the 1908 games held in Great Britain, where  
2 percent of the athletes were women, newspaper, England, 1908. 

© 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

-3- 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 3 

Source:  Arnold Lunn, British Olympic team official at the 1936 games held in Germany, 
autobiography, 1956. 

The young Nazis were encouraged to believe that a ski race was a competition in which 
Germans sought to prove not that they were better skiers than other people but more 
importantly, that Nazism was better than democracy. The only thing that mattered to  
them was victory, and all means to this end were justified. The downhill course was closed 
to all competitors the day before the race, but the Nazis, we soon learned, had practiced the 
course at dawn. They also turned the technique of making protests into a fine art. Any 
decision that could be challenged was challenged in order to provide themselves with some 
advantage. 

Document 4 

Source:  Bob Matthias, United States competitor in the 1952 games held in Finland, 
magazine interview, 1972. 

There were many pressures on American athletes because of the presence of the Soviet 
team in 1952. They were in a real sense the enemy. You just loved to beat ’em. You just 
had to beat ’em. It wasn’t like competing against some guys from a friendly country like 
Australia. This feeling was strong down through the whole team, even among our athletes 
in sports where the Russians didn’t excel. 

Document 5 

Source:  Ryotaro Azuma, mayor of Tokyo, and chairman of the committee that organized 
the 1964 games held in Japan, magazine interview, 1972. 

It was a national crusade for Japan to host the Olympic Games. After the Second World 
War, we were still struggling under a defeated-enemy syndrome in the eyes of most of the 
world. Without the magic of the Olympics we might not have gotten what we needed to 
rise as a world trade power. I’d hate to think of the situation in Tokyo today if not for the 
Olympic Games. 

© 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

-4- 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Document 6 

Source:  Information guide provided to members of the press, published by the Soviet 
Union’s Olympic Organizing Committee, 1980. 

The fact that Moscow has been chosen to stage the 1980 Olympic Games is the result of 
the consistent and peaceful foreign policy pursued by the Soviet Union, which is a beacon 
of peace, democracy, and social progress. This honor is also the expression of the respect 
for the great Soviet achievements in physical education and sport. 

Document 7 

Source:  Japan Economic Journal, newspaper editorial, Japan, 1988. 

Nine corporations from around the world have been selected as top sponsors for this year’s 
Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, but Korean companies are not on the list. Korea failed to 
avail itself of an opportunity to display its industrial and economic power to a worldwide 
television audience. Regardless of who takes home the medals, corporations from the 
United States, Japan, and some other countries stand to make a lot of gold at the Seoul 
Olympics. 

Document 8 

Source:  Hassiba Boulmerka, Algerian competitor in the 1992 games held in Spain, where 
29 percent of the athletes were women, newspaper interview, 1995. 

My victories give me confidence, and they give confidence to my country. I represent  
my country and all the women in my country who aspire to be athletes. Nothing will deter 
me from that mission. For every critic denouncing my running in shorts, there are friends 
and family who urge me to continue. I have a tremendous spirit to run and win. A lot of 
women in my country are capable of becoming athletes, but psychologically, they don’t 
think so. They have to become stronger in the mind, not just in the body. 

© 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

-5- 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

Source:  International Olympic Committee statistics. 

Document 9 

Document 10 

Source:  Ali Kabir, sports writer for the Internet edition of the English-language Pakistani 
newspaper Dawn, Pakistan, 2002. 

The rise and fall of Pakistan’s men’s field hockey team in the 2000 Olympics reflects  
our social values which have shrunk from that of national pride to self-promotion. After 
partition [from India in 1947], people were willing to sacrifice anything for the newborn 
country. Working tirelessly, our team finished second to its archrivals from India in the 
1956 Olympics and won its first gold medal in 1960. However, the current national team  
is clueless and has tarnished the country’s name. Unless changes are made, this era will be 
known as the darkest period in Pakistan’s sports history. 

END OF PART A 

© 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

-6- 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 
Part B 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 

Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Uses world historical context to show continuities and changes over time. 
  • Analyzes the process of continuity and change over time. 

 2.  Analyze the changes and continuities in commerce in the Indian Ocean region from 

650 C.E. to 1750 C.E. 

© 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

-7- 

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 AP® WORLD HISTORY FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 

WORLD HISTORY 
SECTION II 
Part C 
(Suggested planning and writing time—40 minutes) 
Percent of Section II score—33 1/3 

Directions:  You are to answer the following question. You should spend 5 minutes organizing or outlining your essay. 

Write an essay that: 

  • Has a relevant thesis and supports that thesis with appropriate historical evidence. 
  • Addresses all parts of the question. 
  • Makes direct, relevant comparisons. 
  • Analyzes relevant reasons for similarities and differences. 

 3.  Compare the emergence of nation-states in nineteenth-century Latin America with the 

emergence of nation-states in ONE of the following regions in the twentieth century. 

Sub-Saharan Africa  

The Middle East  

STOP 

END OF EXAM 

© 2008 The College Board. All rights reserved. 
Visit apcentral.collegeboard.com (for AP professionals) and www.collegeboard.com/apstudents (for students and parents). 

-8- 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
